Welcome to Introduction to
Flutter Workshop at Frontend Masters.
My name is Maximiliano, I can go with Max.
I'm @firt on Twitter, firt.dev my website,
and actually I'm a mobile/web developer.
So I've been doing web
development since 1995,
and mobile app development since 2001,
that's before Android, before iPhone.
And I'm from Argentina,
I'm actually living in Buenos Aires.
So before the pandemic,
I was actually a frequent traveler and
I'm getting back to it.
So we're going to jump
directly into our topic.
So we're going to be making an app today
in this framework known as Flutter.
So we're going to cover first,
the basics of Flutter as a framework,
as a platform, and
also the basics of Dart.
Dart is going to be the language that
we're going to use to write Flutter
applications.
We are going to understand all
the tools that we need first.
So everything that we need to install
to actually make Flutter applications.
If you are VS Code developer, so
if you like to use Visual Studio Code,
you can use it.
If you prefer things like JetBrain IDEs,
you can also use Android Studio.
So, we're going to see how to test and
debug your app, so how that works.
How to create and
design your user interface.
So what are the main differences
compared with other frameworks,
including maybe HTML, so
what are the differences?
Then how to navigate between screens,
how to work with data,
including how to access web services.
So how to make HTTP requests
using the Flutter framework.
And finally, we're going to see how to
make not just mobile applications for
iOS and Android,
those are our main goals today.
We're going to see also how to
make a progressive web app, a PWA.
A progressive web app for now, as
a quick spoiler, it's actually a website
with some kind of superpowers that can
convert itself into an offline capable
installable app in your device, including
desktop and mobile devices, okay?
But that's a spoiler for
the end of the workshop.
So pre-requisites, I am assuming that you
know programming in any language with OOP.
So if you know what a class is, an object,
an instance, a method, a variable,
okay, you're good to go.
In that website,
firtman.github.io/intro-flutter,
you have a companion website, if you
wanna follow along with what I'm doing.
I'm going to push my code into GitHub but
also you have there all the steps and
the code in case you wanna copy and paste.
The code might not be
100% the same as the one
that I will be doing while live coding,
but it's going to be pretty similar.
So there also we have the slides, in case
you wanna download and see my slides.
That is just for the first part of
the training, most of the workshop
will be live coding, and the links for
the requirements that we need to install.
And then I wanna start with that, so
I will get out of the presentation for
a minute and I will go to that website.
Because I want you to start installing and
downloading everything you need,
because it may take time, it depends on
your connection, it might take some time.
So, one good news first is that even
if you have problems installing all
the tools, you can still do Dart coding
and even Flutter coding on the web.
So there are a couple of websites that you
can use to actually even write your user
interface and test your user interface
without installing anything.
But of course, we will install all
the tools and run everything locally.
But in case you just wanna play with this,
have in mind that you can play with this
online, and that's not possible on other,
or it's not so
simple on other platforms, okay?
So, if you go to, again,
firtman.github.io/intro-flutter,
you will see here the table of contents,
TOC, and
in inside introduction,
you have here the requirements.
The first requirement is for
you to install Flutter.
Flutter, the SDK, is actually
available for Mac, Windows, Linux, and
even Chromebooks.
And if you click on this link, you will
go directly to the installation website.
It's just a big zip file for every
platform, it's like 1.5 to 2.5 gigabytes.
You will download that zip file and
you just need to unzip that file, so
there is no installer there, okay?
So you just unzip the contents of
Flutter for your operating system.
And if you click on each operating system,
you will also find instructions
on how to update your path.
Because Flutter is heavily based
on a command line interface.
That doesn't mean that we are going to use
that command line interface a lot because
we can use the IDE, but anyway,
we typically need that folder in the path.
So if you don't know how to
add a new folder to your path,
to your environment variables
in your operating system,
in the Flutter website,
you have all the instructions.
After doing that,
then you will need to pick one IDE to use.
I will show you how to use both anyway,
but
you can pick Visual Studio Code or
Android Studio.
In any case, on both platforms, you will
need to download plugins for Flutter.
So by default, they don't support Flutter.
So for example, on VS Code,
when you go to your extensions,
you can just search for Flutter and be
sure that you're installing the Flutter.
When you install the Flutter extension,
it will also install the Dart
extension automatically for you, okay?
So that's all you need from this side.
What about compiling the apps?
So to compile the apps,
by the way, we didn't yet
cover which platforms are compatible,
but I have already mentioned.
And if you're here, you've already know
that Flutter will compile apps for
iOS and Android at least.
But to do that, Flutter relies on the SDKs
and compilers from the official SDKs.
Meaning that, if you wanna
compile an Android application,
you will need to install Android Studio or
the Android SDK, but
Android Studio includes
everything you need.
So it's available for
Linux, Mac, and Windows.
You also need to go and install and
download Android Studio.
It has an installer, so
it's actually pretty simple,
you just install the app, and that's all.
Even if you're not going to use
Android Studio as your Flutter IDE,
because you can pick Android Studio or
VS Code,
you need Android Studio tools to emulate
and compile the Android application.
If you don't wanna compile
an Android application,
then you don't need to install it,
so it's up to you.
And if you want to
compile iOS applications,
the first bad news that I have for
you is that you will need a Mac.
I mean, that's bad news only
if you don't have a Mac, but
to compile an iOS application,
you will need a Mac, okay?
So if you're on Windows or Linux,
you won't be able to use
Flutter to compile the Mac.
But then you can borrow a Mac from
a friend, take your same source code and
then make the compilation there, so
it's not going to be a big deal.
So in this case, if you have a Mac,
what you need to install is Xcode, and
Xcode is a free IDE
available in the App Store.
So you just need to go to the App Store
in your Mac and download Xcode.
That's for simulating and
also to compiling iOS application, okay?
And the final thing that you need to
download are the workshop's assets.
Just a zip file that you have
here with a couple of images and
some source code that we will use
later today in the workshop, okay?
Just in case you wanna use
Android Studio as your IDE,
let me show you how to install the plugin,
the Flutter plugin.
So when you are in Android Studio,
you don't need to do this if you're
going to use Visual Studio Code.
You go to Preferences, and within
Preferences you have the Plugins section.
And within Plugins section, you go to
the marketplace where you can see all
the plugins available, and you just search
for Flutter, I have already installed it.
And when you install the Flutter plugin,
it will also install the Dart plugin.
So you have the language and the framework
plugin both at the same time.
So after you have done this, you're ready
to start developing apps in Flutter, yeah?
>> And
you also talked about a Flutter SDK?
>> So the Flutter SDK is actually this
requirement when you install Flutter.
So you always need to install
the Flutter SDK first, and
then the plugin for your IDE.
So the plugin for
any IDE will actually search for the SDK.
So you actually need to download though,
that 1.5 gigabytes of files,
and then the plug in your IDE will
actually point to that SDK, okay?
So, at this point, it's a good time
to tell you that compared with other,
let's say mobile UI toolkit frameworks,
Flutter, it's a little bit low level.
I mean it's not a problem by itself, but
you will see that there are many steps
that you don't have just one
single style and you're done.
You have to make a lot of stuff up and
running, okay, and
we will get into the details
of everything in a minute.
So at this point, I just want to start
telling you that you should start
downloading these files while
we are talking about Flutter and
what it is and
what are we going through today.